hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery here with
another China history podcast today
we're doing part six of our cultural
revolution overview in our overly long
episode last time we ended with the
Luhan incident of July 20th 1967 and the
subsequent torching of the British
Embassy in Beijing there are so many
milestones and defining moments in the
Cultural Revolution that finally led to
this summer of 1967 when Mao's mass
movement started to go off the rails in
a big way this led to all kinds of
sometimes desperate efforts to get
everything back under control and
remember at the same time the party
center always had to make it look like
this you know no matter how bad it was
was all normal and find out ways to spin
every disasters but it you know looked
like a great success
one of Chairman Mao's specialties
fortunately with all these social and
political chaos and now chaos in the
military as well it finally got so bad
that even Mao allowed Joe and I to talk
him out of continuing on with this whole
thing at least in the manner in which ma
was carrying things out and it all sort
of built up to this moment when the
party center saw that they were losing
that comfortable feeling of control that
they always enjoyed since day one not
only were they losing control of the
military but even the masses started to
ignore orders before 1966 it would have
been unthinkable to ignore anything
major or minor for that matter that came
from the party center in Beijing
nothing carried more weight than that
yet by the summer of 1967 when Mao Joe
and the CCR G are trying to pour water
on the fire
they just can't put it out these red
guards and hooligans and everyone else
out having a good time weren't going to
allow these good times to end the future
they faced going back to where they came
from was a dismal thought for many once
you taste that forbidden fruit how can
you
they go back to the drudgery from whence
you came was only two years before in
early 1965 that Mao started making a big
deal about wool Hans play it all led to
this the calamity Mao was facing in the
summer of 1967 was the result of events
he set in motion when he decided to go
after the top party leadership and blow
things up in China for the sake of
continuing the revolution you remember
in part one mA had bolted from Beijing
in October of 1965 and planned his next
move from the south by April of 66
puncheon and his entire lineup were
overthrown Milo's planning was so far so
good but May 25th 1966 nians puts up
that dotsub off in Peking you and the
next thing you know it's July 16th and
Mao is swimming in the mighty young the
symbolic line of demarcation between
northern and southern China and August
1966 the 11th plenum puts in a new line
up in Beijing in all the while Mao is
tightening the noose on all his targets
and then August 5th 1966 mile let's fly
is first dots about saying bombard the
headquarters and this is followed up a
couple weeks later with that first of
eight rallies and it's at the first one
on August 18th then song bean bean puts
the Red Guard armband on Mao and then
everyone is on the go and the whole
Cultural Revolution is off and running
one by one all of my opponents are who
he thought were his opponents are all
kicked out and replaced with a totally
all Mao friendly Linna Red Guards and
anyone out for a good time are taking
the destruction of the four olds to
heart much to the chagrin of museum
curators families and other lovers of
Chinese culture in China
January 28th 1967 miles
eight-point order gives the PLA the
power to bash heads and maintain order
the Shanghai communal
power seizure in Shanghai happens in the
same month
then came the February counter-current
followed by Mao's 10-point order of
April 6th where the Chairman makes a
complete turnaround from his earlier
eight-point order and now the PLA is
under attack from within and without
summer of 1967 for the sake of setting
up revolutionary committees to replace
the traditional party committees power
seizures are going on all over China
some succeeding most failing but it was
chaos nonetheless and violence of the
worst kind
you had the Wuhan incident July 20th and
then the burning and looting of the
British Embassy a month later and the
cherry on top was that by August 67 all
the leftists rebels and no doubt other
riffraff as well were all armed courtesy
of Chairman Mao and so we pick up from
there from about April to September of
1967 Leo showed she had been getting
savaged although no one is printing his
name and the official party press
there's plenty of ranting about China's
Khrushchev and the top party person
taking the capitalist Road no mistake
who they're talking about ever but not
until his name is printed in the
official party press or other organs of
communication is it a hundred percent
official August 14th 1967 a week before
the British Embassy got torched in a
People's Daily in red flag editorial you
can't get more official than that new
shot she is accused of mainly three
things undermining the socialist system
for decades trying to turn the CPPCC an
NPC into a bourgeois style bicameral
parliament and failing to support Mao
and Lucien during the whole Punk dawai
affair now everyone was screaming for
Leos head louder than ever before the
steady drumbeat
that had been going on lightly at first
since 1964 1965 was now
reaching a crescendo mobs showed up
regularly outside children high
demanding to struggle though they would
soon get their chance and not only low
but his wife one guangmei would face the
most brutal and degrading struggle
sessions it all worked out well for
Chairman Mao he wanted to get rid of Leo
and his whole power base their power
base you know were the party committees
the party committees were replaced in
most cases revolutionary committees and
these revolutionary committees were all
loyal to Mao the Red Guards have been
the facilitators in a way of these
revolutionary committees and we saw in
the last episodes these Red Guards
through the very chaos they created
played a huge role in toppling the
status quo and pushing everything out of
the way for Mao to make his comeback but
what to do about the Red Guards they
were all wound up and committing all
their atrocities and I guess you could
say they we're doing everything Mao
asked them to do and then some
but now that Mao had what he wanted who
in the heck needed these Red Guards
anymore they were now starting to make
him look bad mal couldn't have been too
happy about all the blowback from
allowing the Red Guards to create such
havoc when they took over the Foreign
Ministry in June of 1967 they destroyed
records and carried out enough
destruction to completely throw China's
foreign relations into utter disarray in
addition to being a movement targeting
intellectuals the Cultural Revolution
was also all about anti for and
anti-imperialism and even though Joanne
Lai signed off on the ultimatum that was
given to the British Embassy knew before
they fort was burned down he hadn't
expected that what happened later would
happen so now these Red Guards were
becoming a total embarrassment and they
had to go one of the holiest of Holies
of the CCP was and remains the control
of pretty much everything but now the
Red Guards had become this center of
power that operated outside the control
of the party many times or
came straight from the party center and
the Red Guards you know said yeah right
sure you know and they ignored orders
even when they came from Mao and Joe
so finally even Mao saw this problem
although I'm sure premier Joe had to
pull out all the stops to finally get
the Chairman to listen to his voice of
reason
so Mao decided to turn on them but how
to turn off the switch how to whine this
down there wasn't anyone who could
possibly say what had to be said except
Joe and lye he was the only one standing
who still had the street cred to tell
the Red Guards and everyone else playing
the game that it was all over he did
this on September 1st 1967 in this
announcement the premier orders them to
cease their revolutionary activity
abandoned violence and stop attacking
foreigners and basically to go home Joe
and I then met with a select group of
red guard leaders and told them on
September 17th he had a message from
Chairman Mao saying the the little
revolutionary generals you knows what he
called them had begun making mistakes
and it was time to hang it all up and go
back to their studies and their studies
moving forward in 67 68 was very very
heavy on the anti West anti imperialist
propaganda as well as you know high on
the sayings of Chairman Mao now came
time for the party to re-establish
control over all the power they had
given away that was now challenging
their supremacy of the CCP and the
central state apparatus and at the same
time Mao had to find someone or some
group to blame for the ultra violence
that had gotten so out of hand and the
scapegoats ended up being a roll call
for almost everyone in the CCR Jie who
had somehow helicoptered up from
relative obscurity to great heights of
power now John Chiang Khong Zhang Qian
Botha yawen yen and others you know they
were safe for the time being
they'd have blame heaped on them another
time for
now it was time to go on the attack
against those who had themselves been on
the attack since the very beginning and
what became known as the may 16th
conspiracy the party center accused
these May 16th plotters of taking
advantage of divisions within the
movement to foment violence and anarchy
in order to create an environment where
the so-called proletarian headquarters
of Chairman Mao could be overthrown and
power over the state could be seized and
so as it often happens in these
totalitarian systems where doublespeak
and all kinds of strange ways of
explaining things are such a high art
these ultra leftists troublemakers who
went just a little too far and their
enthusiasm to create revolution well now
that became known as counter
revolutionary Rytas who were only
ultra-left in form but ultra right in
essence the hunt for these so-called May
16th elements was carried out nationwide
beginning in the fall of 67 and a lot of
people who got caught up in this dragnet
were either extremely inconvenienced or
killed the first three to get nailed
were guan fung cheap on you and wanly
who we recall from the last episode Wang
Lee was the one who was kidnapped by the
million heroes during the Wuhan incident
and who was able to get back to Beijing
alive and be welcomed on the tarmac at
Capital Airport by Joe and Lai himself
and who had that he had that Wang Lee
had that big rally in Tiananmen Square
to welcome him back with the chef's
future a hero on one day and now so soon
after his great moment he's now a
villain now Mao had second thoughts
about cheap on use so he let him go for
the time being but she is gonna get it a
short time later cheap on you was a
hardcore radical propagandist
speechwriter an attack dog who helped to
facilitate the downfall of the highest
party leaders targeted by mouth he had
that that Golden Pen and knew how to
write these scathing attacks in the
party mouthpieces guan fung also was
another of mao when the ccr cheese
attacked
now it was their turn to be on the
receiving end of this madness still
going on so this whole May 16th
conspiracy it wasn't really a conspiracy
it was just a kind of a mechanism that
made it convenient to deliver these
trumped-up charges against all these
sacrificial lambs and keep as much blame
as possible on them all the stuff that
got out of hand and began to actually
threaten the leadership of Mao were all
blamed on them so in August 25th 1968
mall said they had to go on August 30th
the Pierre Wang Li and Kuan Fung they
both had to face their former CCR G
colleagues and it was pre-arranged that
Kang Shan would lead the attack against
Wang Li and Chen ba da would twist the
knife inside Kuan Fung and as was her
style in her prerogative
Chen King led her own attack against
both of them so we see here the CCR G is
cannibalizing itself already and then by
order of the three holiest organs of
power the party the CCR G and the State
Council the army is called in to restore
order now everyone who was handed a gun
or a rifle when mal came up with his
wild idea to arm the left they all had
to be returned and furthermore these
hotheads who at one time had mouths
blessing were told to stand back and not
interfere with the Army's restoration of
order and so began the attack on these
so-called ultra leftists who are now
being attacked for doing the dirty work
of Mao in the CCR G well you know they
had served their purpose and now they
had become a liability so they were
labeled a typical counter-revolutionary
organization and all the factional
violence that they carried out in the
terrible summer of 1967 was blamed on
them or officially blamed on what was
referred to as the may 16th corps May
16th by the way was the date in 1966
that Mao issued the circular that first
announced the Cultural Revolution
so like I said it was easy to turn the
red guards on but not easy to turn them
off many Red Guard units refused to
disband and dared to defy orders these
youngins were the hardest core of the
leftist they stood up to whoever told
them to stand down even the party center
now six months ago they would have
gotten away with this but not now no one
was in the mood anymore for what had
just happened now in January of 1968 Mao
was washing his hands at these Red
Guards and under the bus they go in
France in July of 1794 yet the
thermidorian reaction that spelled
curtains for the radicals
you know Robespierre sounds used and
their ilk now in China their own
homegrown thermidorian reaction was
revving up and the order of the day was
to retreat from this ultra radicalism to
show they were serious the authorities
staged many a public execution to drive
home the point what fate waited for
those who wanted to keep on going when
Mao was saying enough schools and
universities began to open a few weeks
later but as I said the new syllabus was
heavy on the promo thought anti-west
anti-capitalist antiparallel speak and
what about the majority of people who
just tried to get by those who weren't
red guards are terribly active in the
campaign they had spent the past couple
years trying to blend in and you know
participate only as much as they
absolutely had to in order to avoid
trouble by the spring of 68 these people
could start to breathe a little bit
easier by then the worst was over the
plenty of bad still remained and lie
ahead that bizarre carnival atmosphere
where there was little law and
definitely no order seemed in the past
in July of 1968 Mao himself summoned
student leaders for a private audience
and there he told them tearfully it said
that it was all over for the
guards and when the students walked away
from that encounter with the great one I
wonder if they felt they had been used
in a big way the PLA was back to busting
heads again and anyone who didn't fall
into line or thought 1966 was gonna go
on forever got beaten killed or
incarcerated but most all they got sent
down sent down to the countryside to the
villages to anywhere but the cities and
towns the students who in August 1966
were on top of the world at least in
China found themselves facing a very
cruel fate indeed they all had the Shan
Shan Shan Hsiung go up to the mountains
and down to the countryside they were
being sent down learned from the
peasants and faced a very uncertain
future ostensibly they were being sent
down to learn for the peasants but the
reality was they were being sent as far
away as possible out into the sticks
where they couldn't cause any trouble
and mind you as I mentioned they had
already had a brief but concentrated
taste of the good life traveling around
the country being the center of
attention
this was quite a bitter pill for all
those sent down a lot of them are still
there today between 1967 and 1979
something like 12 million urban youth
were sent down to the countryside the
total number of so-called rusticated
educated youth numbered around 16
million four hundred seventy thousand
the cities from which most of these
youth were sent down were of course
Beijing and Shanghai but also Tianjin
hangzhou Nanjing Wuhan and chengdu also
Chongqing the lucky ones at least got to
stay in their own province but most they
were sent to the notorious how shall we
say rough and Lesser desirable parts of
China this was Inner Mongolia Xin Jung
Yun nan hey long Chung but as we'll see
later sending all these hot-headed Red
Guards to the countryside did not end
the fighting or vial
it just it just shifted it into a new
form so suffice to say finally at last
more or less the whole red guard
movement is kaput by the autumn of 1968
and so comes the next major milestone of
these cultural revolution time this was
the 12th plenum held in Beijing October
13th to 31st 1968 this was the first one
since April 1966 when Mao first went on
the attack this session was a big one
not only did it include the Central
Committee but also present for the
meeting were surviving CCR G members and
the heaviest hitters still standing from
the PLA in the provinces by 1968 Mao had
cleared the decks of any and all
perceived opponents to his leadership
and authority so this particular plenums
purpose was to legitimize everything Mao
had done after he cleaned house in the
party and the signature event of mouse
housecleaning was the purging of Leo
Shao Qi and Doug Xiao ping the plenum
approved a document that completely and
without reservation denounced Leo Shao
Qi and by the way the ones who were
tasked to write this denunciation were
the team of Kong hyung and Jim Ching boy
those two had sure come a long way since
their younger days together back in
Shandong pinned on Leo are all the
crimes that had before only just been
inferred you know like China's
Khrushchev renegade traitor scab hiding
in the party Lackey of imperialism
modern revisionism men KMT reactionaries
you know five months after this plenum
is the ninth Party Congress that opened
on April 1st 1969 this is the historic
Congress where Lin Biao is officially
made mouthed Showzen successor and it's
also at this Congress that Jiang Ching
Chung Chung the cream of the CCR G are
all given seats on the Politburo this
was a
- this was a very deeply divided
Politburo the purge of Leo and dung was
ratified and that puts an exclamation
point on that whole thing that had been
dragging on since the time of hydrate
Pakwan
in in 1965 lille was permanently
expelled from the party
Leo xiaochi today has been fully
rehabilitated and pretty much viewed as
a good guy in modern Chinese history and
the poster person for a persecuted
victim he tragically died in a dank
prison cell and Kai Fung and hood nan
province on November 12th 1969 the story
of his last year and how he was allowed
to slowly waste away denied medicine
denied medical treatment for his
diabetes and any kind of comfort this is
a cruel and heartbreaking story that he
was posthumously rehabilitated you know
hardly can compensate for what Mao
subjected his old comrade to as we all
know dung Xiao ping although he was
disgraced and had to endure no small
amount of humiliation and personal
tragedy was to a degree protected by Mao
and didn't suffer the same fate as Leo
xiaochi a new party Constitution was
written and approved Kong Shang was
instrumental in the drafting of this
documents he could be sure it was heavy
on style and light on substance and it
elevated Mao Zedong thoughts to the same
astronomical heights of marxism-leninism
Cong not only made it into the Politburo
he also got into the Standing Committee
the Standing Committee of the ninth
Party Congress had only five members and
these were the most powerful men in
China yet Cong Chun and the other four
of course were Maul and Jo and lye and
rounding out the standing committee were
Lin Biao and Chen Botha this was an
all-male friendly liner put in place at
the jota the ninth party congress the
military was never more represented than
in this new
Central Committee lineup from the ninth
Party Congress the Cultural Revolution
would still drag on for seven more years
on June 17th 1967 China had detonated
the first thermonuclear device and this
didn't do anything to warm sino-soviet
relations to say that relations were
frosty and frigid between these two
during the Cultural Revolution would not
do the words justice I haven't mentioned
much about sino-soviet relations because
this is a very big future topic here I'm
a China history podcast we've touched on
relations between these two giant
neighbors and previous podcasts but
we'll focus in on the history of Russian
and later Soviet relations with China at
a different time by the time of the
ninth Party Congress Russia had about a
million troops along the 2,500 mile long
border with China on March 2nd 15th and
17th 1969 we'll see the famous shootout
between Soviet and Chinese troops on the
Ussuri River up in the extreme northeast
and damansky island also known as
jump-a-thon
intensive Soviet firepower blasted away
on the Chinese side after what was most
likely a Chinese instigated fight then
again in July there is another major
flare up near Khabarovsk in the
northeast corner of China and it wasn't
just in Manchuria out in the northwest
where Xin Jiang boarded the Soviet Union
you know to the west and to the north
there was also a whole lot of tension
not to mention military skirmishes this
amidst everything else going on weighed
very heavy on mouths mind
joey'll I met with Alexei Kosygin who I
think we could call the Joe and Lai of
Russia and these two very professional
and experienced statesmen tried to cool
things down between you know the two
great powers they met at Beijing Airport
on 9/11 1969 this didn't do anything to
put a lid on the tensions and you know
whatever Kosygin would say would be
manipulated in such
way is you know to provide maximum
disinformation value you know once
things begin to fall apart in the late
50s and early 60s it really never
recovered between China and the Soviet
Union China and Russia you know they had
to start all over and you know now you
know they maintained good relations in
February of 1969 Mao had called on his
four marshals Chinese xuxian Chen
Niranjan and yet Chen Yin to take stock
of China's general strategic position
with respect to foreign relations it was
this team who first came up with the
idea that the Soviet Union was actually
China's main enemy not the USA this act
by Mao to ask the advice of these four
trusted men you know who are still in a
state of semi disgrace that got the ball
rolling that culminated in the visit to
China of Richard Nixon a couple years
later throughout 1968 and into 1969 as
the flames of the Mao cult burned
white-hot China was still convulsing
from all the witch-hunts anarchy and
factional fighting still going on Red
Guards may have been defamed but that
didn't mean the killing everywhere
stopped industry and commerce was
severely degraded the production figures
weren't anything like what you saw
during the Great Leap Forward but things
were a mess
Mao had gone and done something totally
stupid well in retrospect but at the
time maybe it seemed like a good idea
just as Mao was starting to plan his
Cultural Revolution there was this sense
of clear and present danger of possible
Soviet attack or attacked by other
imperialists Mao didn't want to see
China's industrial infrastructure you
know mostly located along the coastal
provinces fall into imperialist hands or
be affected by any invasion or nuclear
attack from the Soviet Union or the USA
so they created this Third Front or
third line of defense way
in the West where you know it was
thought to be safe from attack
historical experience proved that the
deeper you went into China the harder it
was for invaders to fight as the
Japanese learned in 1930s and 40s the
coast and central China might fall but
forget about the west of the Southwest
it was too far too rugged and too hard
to hold on if they if they could take
any cities so all this industry got
moved West I mean they stopped
production disassembled whole plants and
loaded up everything on railroad cars
and moved entire industries way way
inland to be unloaded and set up
somewhere safe in a remote and desolate
not to mention impractical area of China
the cost to do this was staggering I was
running in the hundreds and hundreds of
millions of yen or RMB so this bright
idea already had begun to drain China
funds so when the Cultural Revolution in
67 68 and 69 began to ravage China's
economy and production it only
exacerbated matters between the Third
Front policies and the economic blowback
of all the anarchy China's economy
really fell on hard times by the end of
1969 it was obvious whatever steps had
been taken to return to some degree of
normalcy nothing was working so in
February they launched the one strike
three ante campaign the ethos unfine da
means to strike as in strike down
counter revolutionary measures the three
auntie's or son fund were calls against
graft and embezzlement yeah even a
problem back then profiteering was the
second and extravagance and waste the
third this ethos on fund campaigns sort
of opened up a very wide and
far-reaching umbrella of ills that could
be interpreted you know how you want it
the result was a very brutal local
crackdown against almost anyone I mean
you could almost do anything and be
accused of being a kind of
Ellucian arey what kind of account of
revolutionary was in the eyes of the
beholder
this one strike three anti campaign went
on into 1970 and 71 and in some parts
into 1972 all the local areas in China
dutifully reported in their results you
know how many arrested how many executed
you know for both political and or
economic crimes well it was all just an
excuse to crack down and whatever class
enemies might still be out there that
you know the first 4 to 5 years of the
Cultural Revolution hadn't smashed yet
while this campaign ferreted out any
undesirables out in the provinces Mao
turned his attention to the top
leadership again there were always more
counter revolutionaries to be smoked out
we're gonna wind things down here for
this episode by discussing something Lin
Bo did they had spelled the beginning of
the end for him as I mentioned before
China was on high alert for all of 1969
there was this constant fear of Soviet
nuclear attack or invasion that was you
know not necessarily real but made for
great propaganda value to mobilize the
masses and keep them on their toes and
loyal to their leaders lindy I went and
did something that caused Mao to blow
his top in fear of a possible Soviet
attack timed to strike sometime around
China's October first National Day
celebration this one being the 20th
anniversary of the founding of the PRC
Lin decided to mobilize the military in
response to this possible attack now
normally no big deal after all
no one more than Wow kept pointing a
finger at the Soviet Union and warning
of the mischief these guys were always
up to when it came to China but Lin Bo
made the colossal error of ordering this
massive mobilization of the Armed Forces
without going to the big man first the
attack on China didn't come on National
Day but that didn't stop Lee Ann from
issuing this directive on October 17th
you know that called for this
mobilization Lindy I went ahead and did
the
without asking Mao who knows why Linton
never did anything without clearing it
through mile first was he getting too
cocky now that he was miles designated
successor did he want to test mom
whatever the case
Malta dong was not happy and this threw
up a warning signal immediately Mao saw
how on Lin's word alone the military was
able to respond quickly and in no time
at all they were on the move to you know
execute this order Mao must have been
thinking Jesus Linh beyond wants to move
against me look how fast he can mobilize
the PLA to move if there weren't any
seeds yet planted in mouse head about
Lin biles loyalty this incident did the
trick so in this environment of
hostility with the Soviet Union both
real and perceived and then with Lin Bo
so called first order where he went and
mobilized the PLA without moms approval
I'll be going to think how to cool
things down with all the civil unrest
and also lessen the existential threat
from Russia in doing this Mao could take
care of the higher objective of getting
the PLA to get out of his battle siege
frame of mind and the wheels within
wheels turning in mild Saddam's head was
already laying the foundation that would
lead to Richard Nixon's visit to China
in February of 1972 so next time we'll
carry on with how that whole thing fit
into the Cultural Revolution and what it
means for China as we enter the 1970s
we've looked at 1966 1967 68 and 69 and
saw how the whole thing unfolded now
we're about to enter the 1970s so that's
for next time I'd like to give a special
shout-out to my nephew gaybraham the
16th DJ you know of my entire family on
eight continents not a single one
listens to the China history podcast I
can't even get my kids to listen the
only one who listens or says he does is
my nephew Gabe just graduated from Gao
jiong last week and in two months is
bound for the nation's capital where he
will commence his studies at Georgetown
University so a very
happy graduation to my my-y shun that's
all for this time this is your host and
humble narrator Laszlo Montgomery
signing off from a kid you not the hotel
lucerna in the municipality of Mexicali
capital of Baja California state here
south of the border and Mexico checking
out a few border factories that's all
just spending the night and back
tomorrow to San Diego where I parked my
car and then a mere two hours I'll be
back in Claremont more cultural
revolution when we meet again so join me
next time won't you for another exciting
episode of the China history podcast